93

CHAP. XXXI.

Of Crimes of difficult Proof.

With the foregoing principles in view, it will appear astonishing, that reason hardly ever presided at the formation of the laws of nations ; that the weakest and most equivocal evidence, and even conjectures have been thought sufficient proof for crimes the most atrocious, (and therefore most improbable) the most obscure, and chimerical ; as if it were the interest of the laws and the judge not to inquire into the truth, but to prove the crime; as if there were not a greater risk of condemning an innocent person when the probability of his guilt is less. 

The generality of men want that vigour of
mind and resolution which are as necessary for
great crimes, as for great virtues, and which at
the same time produce both the one and the other
in those nations, which are supported by the acti-
vity of their government, and a passion for the
public good. For in those which subsist by their
greatness or power, or by the goodness of their
laws the passions being in a weaker degree, seem
calculated rather to maintain than to improve the
form of government. This naturally lead us
to an important conclusion, viz. that great crimes
do not always produce the destruction of a na-
tion.

THERE are some crimes, which though fre-
quent in society, are of difficult proof, a circum-
stance admitted, as equal to the probability of the
innocence of the accused. But as the frequency
of these crimes is not owing to their impunity so
much as to other causes, the danger of their pas-
sing unpunished is of less importance, and there-
fore the time of examination, and prescription

95
may be equally diminished. These principles
are different from those commonly received ; for
it is in crimes, which are proved with the greatest
difficulty, such as adultery, and sodomy, that
presumptions, half proofs, &c. are admitted : as
if a man could be half innocent, and half guilty ;
that is half punishable and half absolvable. It is
in these cases that torture should exercise its cruel
power on the person of the accused, the witnesses,
and even his whole family, as, with unfeeling in-
difference, some Civilians have taught, who pre-
tened to dictate laws to nations.

ADULTERY is a crime, which, politically con-
sidered, owes its existence to two causes, viz.
pernicious laws, and the powerful attraction be-
tween the sexes. This attraction is similar in ma-
ny Circumstances to gravity, the spring of motion
in the universe. Like this, it is diminished by
distance ; one regulates the motion of the body,
the other of the soul. But they differ in one res-
pect ; the force of gravity decreases in proporti-
on to the obstacles that oppose it ; the other
gathers strength and vigour as the obstacles in-
crease.

IF I were speaking to nations guided only by
the laws of nature, I would tell them, that there
is a considerable difference between adultery and
all other crimes. Adultery proceeds from an a-
buse of that necessity, which is constant and uni-


96
versal in human nature ; a necessity anterior to the
formation of society, and indeed the founder of
society itself ; whereas, all other crimes tend to
the destruction of society, and arise from momen-
tary passions, and not from a natural necessity.
It is the opinion of those, who have studied his-
tory and mankind, that this necessity is constant-
ly in the same degree in the same climate. If
this be true, useless, or rather pernicious must all
laws and customs be, which tend to diminish the
sum total of the effects of this passion. Such laws
would only burden one part of society with the
additional necessities of the other ; but, on the
contrary, wise are the laws, which, following the
natural couse of the river, divide the stream into
a number of equal branches, preventing thus
both sterility and inundation.

CONJUGAL fidelity is always greater in propor-
tion as marriages are more numerous, and less
difficult. But when the interest or pride of fami-
lies, or paternal authority, not the inclination of
the parties, unite the sexes, gallantry soon breaks
the slender ties, in spite of common moralists,
who exclaim against the effect, whilst they par-
don the cause. But these reflections are useless to
those, who, living in the true religion, act from
sublimer motives, which correct the eternal laws
of nature.

97
The act of adultery is a crime so instantaneous,
so mysterious, and so concealed by the veil which
the laws themselves have woven ; a veil necessary
indeed, but so transparent, as to heighten rather
than conceal the charms of the object ; the op-
portunities are so frequent, and the danger of dis-
covery so easily avoided, that it were much easier
for the laws to prevent this crime, than to punish
it when committed.

To every crime, which, from its nature, must
frequently remain unpunished, the punishment is
an incentive. Such is the nature of the human
mind, that difficulties, if not insurmountable,
nor too great for our natural indolence, embellish
the object, and spur us on to the pursuit. They
are so many barriers that confine the imagination
to the object, and oblige us to consider it in every
point of view. In this agitation, the mind natu-
rally inclines and fixes itself to the most agreeable
part, studiously avoiding every idea that might
create disgust.

THE crime of sodomy, so severely punished by
the laws, and for the proof of which are employed
tortures, which often triumph over innocence it-
self, has its source much less in the passions of
man in a free and independant state, than in so-
ciety and a slave. It is much less the effect of a
satiety in pleasures, than of that education, which,
in order to make men useful to others, begins by

98
making them useless to themselves. In those pub-
lic seminaries, where ardent youth are carefully
excluded from all commerce with the other sex,
as the vigour of nature blooms, it is consumed in
a manner not only useless to mankind, but which
accelerates the approach of old age.

THE murder of bastard-children is, in like
manner, the effect of a cruel dilemma, in which
a woman finds herself who has been seduced
through weakness ; or overcome by force. The
alternative is, either her own infamy, or the death
of a being, who is incapable of feeling the loss of
life. How can she avoid preferring the last to
the inevitable misery of herself and her unhappy
infant ? The best method of preventing this crime,
would be effectually to protect the weak woman
from that tyranny, which exaggerates all vices
that cannot be concealed under the cloak of
virtue.

I DO not pretend to lessen that just abhorrence
which these crimes deserve, but to discover the
sources from whence they spring ; and I think I
may draw the following conclusion : That the pu-
nishment of a crime cannot be just, (that is, necessa-
ry) if the laws have not endeavoured to prevent that
crime by the best means which times and circumstan-
ces would allow.
