123
CHAP. XXXI.

Of Crimes of difficult Proof.

WITH the foregoing principles in view, it
will appear astonishing, that reason hardly ever
presided at the formation of the laws of nations ;
that the weakest and most equivocal evidence,
and even conjectures, have been thought suffi-
cient proof for crimes the most atrocious, (and
therefore most improbable), the most obscure
and chimerical ; as if it were the interest of the 
laws and the judge not to inquire into the truth.
but to prove the crime ; as if there were not a
greater risk of condemning an innocent person,
when the probability of his guilt is less.

The generality of men want that vigour of
mind and resolution, which are as necessary for
great crimes as for great virtues, and which at
the same time produce both the one and the
other, in those nations which are supported by
the activity of their government, and a passion
for the public good. For in those which subsist
by their greatness or power, or by the goodness
of their laws, the passions being in a weaker de-
gree, seem calculated rather to maintain than to

124
improve the form of government. This naturally
leads us to an important conclusion, viz. that
great crimes do always produce the destruction
of a nation.

There are some crimes which, though fre-
quent in society, are of difficult proof, a circum-
stance admitted, as equal to the probability of the
innocence of the accused. But as the frequency
of these crimes is not owing to their impunity,
so much as to other causes, the danger of their
passing unpunished is of less importance, and
therefore the time of examination and prescrip-
tion may be equally diminished. These principles
are different from those commonly received ;
for it is in crimes, which are proved with the
greatest difficulty, such as adultery, and sodomy,
that presumptions, half-proofs, &c. are admit-
ted ; as if a man could be half innocent, and
half guilty ; that is, half punishable and half
absolvable. It is in these cases that torture
should exercise its cruel power on the person of
the accused, the witnesses, and even his whole
family, as, with unfeeling indifference, some
civilians have taught, who pretend to dictate
laws to nations.

Adultery is a crime which, politically consi-
dered, owes its existence to two causes, viz.
pernicious laws, and the powerful attraction be-

125
tween the sexes. This attraction is similar in
many circumstances to gravity, the spring of
motion in the universe. Like this, it is dimi-
nished by distance ; one regulates the motions of
the body, the other the soul. But they dif-
fer in one respect ; the force of gravity de-
creases in proportion to the obstacles that oppose
it ; the other gathers strength and vigour as the
obstacles increase.

If I were speaking to nations guided only by
the laws of nature, I would tell them, that there
is a considerable difference between adultery
and all other crimes. Adultery proceeds from
an abuse of that necessity which is constant and
universal in human nature ; a necessity anterior
to the formation of society, and indeed the
founder of society itself ; whereas, all other
crimes tend to the destruction of society, and
arise from momentary passions, and not from a
natural necessity. It is the opinion of those,
who have studied history and mankind, that this
necessity is constantly in the same degree in the
same climate. If this be true, useless, or rather
pernicious must all laws and customs be, which
tend to diminish the sum total of the effects of
this passion. Such laws would only burden one
part of society with the additional necessities of
the other, but, on the contrary, wise are the

126
laws which, following the natural course of
the river, divide the stream into a number of
equal branches, preventing thus both sterility
and inundation.

Conjugal fidelity is always greater in propor-
tion as marriages are more numerous, and less
difficult. But when the interest or pride of fa-
milies, or paternal authority, not the inclination
of the parties, unite the sexes, gallantry soon
breaks the slender ties, in spite of common mo-
ralists, who exclaim against the effect, whilst
they pardon the cause. But these reflections
are useless to those, who, living in the true re-
ligion, act from sublimer motives, which correct
the eternal laws of nature.

The act of adultery is a crime so instantane-
ous, so mysterious, and so concealed by the veil
which the laws themselves have woven ; a veil
necessary indeed, but so transparent, as to
heighten rather than conceal the charms of the
object ; the opportunities are so frequent, and
the danger of discovery so easily avoided, that it
were much easier for the laws to prevent this
crime, than to punish it when committed.

To every crime, which from its nature must
frequently remain unpunished, the punishment
is an incentive. Such is the nature of the hu-
man mind, that difficulties, if not insurmount-

127
able, nor too great for our natural indolence,
embellish the object, and spur us on the pur-
suit. They are so many barriers that confine the
imagination to the object, and oblige us to
consider it in every point of view. In this agi-
tation, the mind naturally inclines and fixes itself
to the most agreeable part, studiously avoiding
every idea that might create disgust.

The crime of sodomy, so severely punished
by the laws, and for the proof of which are em-
ployed tortures, which often triumph over in-
nocence itself, has its source much less in the
passions of man in a free and independent state,
than in society and a slave. It is much less the
effect of a satiety in pleasures, than of that edu-
cation, which, in order to make men useful to
others, begins by making them useless to them-
selves. In those public seminaries, where ardent
youth are carefully excluded from all commerce
with the other sex, as the vigour of nature
blooms, it is consumed in a manner not only
useless to mankind, but which accelerates the
approach of old age.

The murder of bastard children is, in like
manner, the effect of a cruel dilemma, in which
a woman finds herself who has been seduced
through weakness, or overcome by force. The
alternative is, her own infamy, or the death of

128
a being who is incapable of feeling the loss of
life. How can she avoid preferring the last to
the inevitable misery of herself and her unhappy
infant ! The best method of preventing this
crime, would be effectually to protect the weak
woman from that tyranny which exaggerates
all vices that cannot be concealed under the
the cloak of virtue.

I do not pretend to lessen that just abhor-
rence which these crimes deserve, but to disco-
ver the sources from whence they spring ; and
I think I may draw the following conclusions :
That the punishment of a crime cannot be just,
(that is, necessary), if the laws have not endea-
voured to prevent that crime by the best means
which times and circumstances would allow.