125
CHAP. XXXI.

Of Crimes of difficult Proof.

WITH the foregoing principles in
view, it will appear astonishing,
that reason hardly ever presided at the for-
mation of the laws of nations ; that the
weakest and most equivocal evidence, and
even conjectures, have been thought suf-
ficient proof for crimes the most atrocious,
(and therefore most improbable) the most
obscure and chimerical ; as if it were the
interest of the laws and the judge not to

126
inquire into the truth, but to prove the
crime ; as if there were not a greater risk of
condemning an innocent person, when the
probability of his guilt is less.

THE generality of men want that vi-
gour of mind, and resolution, which are as
necessary for great crimes, as for great vir-
tues ; and which, at the same time, produce
both the one and the other in those nati-
ons, which are supported by the activity
of their government, and a passion for the
public good. For in those which subsist
by their greatness or power, or by the
goodness of their laws, the passions being
in a weaker degree, seem calculated rather
to maintain than to improve the form of
government. This naturally leads us to an
important conclusion, viz. that great crimes
do not always produce the destruction of a
nation.

THERE are some crimes, which, though
frequent in society, are of difficult proof,
a circumstance admitted, as equal to the
probability of the innocence of the accused.

127
But as the frequency of these crimes is not
owing to their impunity, so much as to
other causes, the danger of their passing
unpunished is of less importance, and there-
fore the time of examination, and prescrip-
tion, may be equally diminished. These
principles are different from those com-
monly received ; for it is in crimes, which
are proved with the greatest difficulty, such
as adultery, and sodomy, that presumpti-
ons, half proofs, &c. are admitted ; as if
a man could be half innocent, and half
guilty ; that is, half punishable and half ab-
solvable. It is in these cases that torture
should exercise its cruel power on the person
of the accused, the witnesses, and even his
whole family, as, with unfeeling indiffer-
ence, some Civilians have taught, who pre-
tend to dictate laws to nations.

ADULTERY is a crime, which, politi-
cally considered, owes its existence to two
causes, viz. pernicious laws, and the
powerful attraction between the sexes.
This attraction is, similar in many circum-
stances to gravity, the spring of motion in

128
the universe. Like this, it is diminished
by distance ; one regulates the motions
of the body, the other of the soul. But
they differ in one respect ; the force of
gravity decreases in proportion to the
obstacles that oppose it ; the other gathers
strength and vigour as the obstacles in-
crease.

IF I were speaking to nations guided
only by the laws of nature, I would
tell them that there is a considerable
difference between adultery and all other
crimes. Adultery proceeds from an abuse
of that necessity, which is constant and
universal in human nature ; a necessity
anterior to the formation of society, and
indeed the founder of society itself ;
whereas all other crimes tend to the de-
struction of society, and arise from mo-
mentary passions, and not from a natural
necessity. It is the opinion of those, who
have studied history and mankind, that
this necessity is constantly in the same de-
gree in the same climate. If this be true,

129
useless, or rather pernicious must all laws
and customs be, which tend to diminish the
sum total of the effects of this passion.
Such laws would only burden one part of
society with the additional necessities of
the other ; but, on the contrary, wise are
the laws, which, following the natural
course of the river, divide the stream into a
number of equal branches, preventing thus
both sterility and inundation.

CONJUGAL fidelity is always greater in
proportion as marriages are more nume-
rous, and less difficult. But when the in-
terest or pride of families, or paternal au-
thority, not the inclination of the parties,
unite the sexes, gallantry soon breaks the
slender ties, in spight of common moralists,
who exclaim against the effect, whilst they
pardon the cause. But these reflections are
useless to those, who, living in the true re-
ligion, act from sublimer motives, which
correct the eternal laws of nature.

130
THE act of adultery is a crime so instan-
taneous, so mysterious, and so concealed
by the veil which the laws themselves have
woven ; a veil necessary indeed, but so tran-
sparent, as to heighten rather than conceal
the charms of the object ; the opportunities
are so frequent, and the danger of discovery
so easily avoided, that it were much easier
for the laws to prevent this crime, than to
punish it when committed.

To every crime, which, from its nature
most frequently remain unpunished, the
punishment is an incentive. Such is the
nature of the human mind, that difficulties,
if not insurmountable, nor too great for
our natural indolence, embellish the ob-
ject, and spur us on to the pursuit. They
are so many barriers that confine the imagi-
nation to the object, and oblige us to con-
sider it in every point of view. In this
agitation, the mind naturally inclines and
fixes itself to the most agreeable part, studi-
ously avoiding every idea that might create
disgust.

131
THE crime of sodomy, so severely pu-
nished by the laws, and for the proof of
which are employed tortures, which often
triumph over innocence itself, has its
source much less in the passions of man
in a free and independant state, than in
society and a slave. It is much less the
effect of a satiety in pleasures, than of that
education, which, in order to make men
useful to others, begins by making them
useless to themselves. In those public se-
minaries, where ardent youth are carefully
excluded from all commerce with the other
sex, as the vigour of nature blooms, it is
consumed in a manner not only useless to
mankind, but which accelerates the ap-
proach of old age.

THE murder of bastard-children is, in
like manner, the effect of a cruel dilemma,
in which a woman finds herself who has
been seduced through weakness, or over-
come by force. The alternative is, either
her own infamy, or the death of a being,
who is incapable of feeling the loss of 
life. How can she avoid preferring the

132
last to the inevitable misery of herself and
her unhappy infant ? The best method of
preventing this crime, would be effectually
to protect the weak woman from that ty-
ranny which exaggerates all vices that
cannot be concealed under the cloak of virtue.

I do not pretend to lessen that just ab-
horrence which these crimes deserve, but
to discover the sources from whence
they spring ; and I think I may draw the follow-
ing conclusion : That the punishment of a
crime cannot be just, (that is necessary) if the
laws have not endeavoured to prevent that
crime by the best means which times and cir-
cumstances would allow.